time to chat with me. I'm the social worker and a mental health coach for a common client, Jenny,
and we do a lot of gardening activities together, but I've noticed that she's been quite down lately
and I came across something called bubble therapy. It's something that helped my sister when she was
struggling and I thought whether you've heard of it and whether this is something that we can
incorporate in the things that we're both doing with Jenny. All right, that's really thoughtful
of you, Phil. Thanks for bringing that up with me, but do we have consent for this conversation?
Oh yes, I've forwarded written consent from Jenny. Okay, all right. I'll keep an eye out for that.
There you go. I just saw the email pop up. So you said about Jenny feeling a bit
low at the moment. How long has it been? Since January I've noticed that she's been losing
interest in things, even the gardening work, which she used to find fun. Her mood's consistently low
and her mum's been mentioning that she's sleeping a lot, eating less, even not enjoying her favourite
takeaways. Okay, that's helpful context. Has she mentioned any thoughts of self-harm or suicide?
No, no. The only thing she has mentioned is she doesn't want to hurt or be a burden to a mother
or a brother. Good thing is she's on her medications daily, but her mum has mentioned that it's around
this time of year that she starts to become quite low and it's remembering the anniversary
of her dad's death. Right, okay. That's really important context because grief, I guess grief
anniversaries can absolutely trigger some depressive episodes as well, but like you said,
the fact that she's on medication and she is still thinking about her mum and her brother,
engaging with your sessions, engaging with my sessions, I think they're all very, very strong
protective factors here. Just curious, appreciate you bringing the bubble therapy idea.
What did your sister find helpful about it? Well, she said that focusing on blowing bubbles pulled
her attention away from her worries and I did a little bit of research and found that it was
part of narrative therapy for children, but for my sister it helped her to calm down, her breathing
was better, people weren't consistently coming up and asking if she was okay, so she was feeling
less of a burden. So I thought, well, if it can work for Jenny, it's worth pursuing it,
it's worth looking at it anyway. Absolutely. I think that's very interesting that you bring it
up because as you were speaking about it, I remembered a peer-reviewed study that I came
across last year when I was doing my masters and one of the key things that that entire study was
about helping children calm down a bit before dental procedures and as part of that, they
helped the children blow, play therapy, I guess, the bubble, blowing bubbles was used as form of a
play, which to kind of bring their levels of anxiety down. So I think your sister's experience
isn't just anecdotal, there is a neuroscience backing to it because the study itself did show
that that particular exercise did help the children, their heart rate was lower as well
as their anxiety levels were lower. However, when the actual dental procedure started immediately
after, the anxiety just went back up again. So that's a very key finding, I think, for that
particular study because what it tells us is that it's as a standalone approach, I think it doesn't
give you a sustained result. So, and especially for Jenny, I think because she's not a child and
she is 40 with clinical depression, so if we start employing untested therapeutic approaches,
sometimes it can perhaps take her agency away and we might be inadvertently infantilising
her needs. Does that make sense? What are your thoughts on this?
It was a concern I had when I read that the therapy had been using children, whether it was
an appropriate one for adults dealing with depression. Exactly. I think what Jenny
genuinely needs is to perhaps change the patterns that maintain her depression.
This is where I think CBT comes in. In my sessions with her, we've been working on
two key things. First, we've been re-examining her automatic thoughts, like the narratives
that we all have, and in depression especially, it kind of whispers, like, I can't do this,
or nothing will get better, or I'm always doing this, I'm always a burden, those kinds of messages.
So in our sessions, we've been challenging some of those thoughts by looking at the evidence and
then developing a more realistic and perhaps more compassionate thinking pattern around it.
But the other aspect of our treatment has been about behavioural activation, which is basically,
I think, which is just as important as challenging some of these automatic negative thoughts.
So depression kind of convinces us to kind of withdraw and to avoid certain emotions.
But when we withdraw, the isolation just gets worse, and our mood gets worse, and the cycle
kind of keeps repeating itself. So the CBT sessions that we've been having, we've been
working together to identify some activities that matter a lot to her. She did mention about
the activities that she's been doing with you and how it aligns with the values.
So we've been using that as an example to gradually help her build some of these coping
mechanisms and build them back into her routine, so to speak. So I think your work is absolutely
essential, and gardening isn't just gardening. As you already know, when you're out there with her,
when she's engaging with that soil, the plants, the growth, that's what we call behavioural
activation in real time. You're getting her moving, you're getting her to be more engaged
with something meaningful, and more importantly, also helping her build capacity. And I think that
has a greater impact on interrupting the cycle of negative thinking that she may be experiencing.
Is that something you've observed? Again, please feel free to jump in any time.
So I figure that those times when I'm trying to get her to come out in the garden and she's
not feeling engaged and she's sort of dragging your heels and doesn't want to do it, getting
it out there can actually be part of a treatment. I think so, yes, exactly. And neurobiologically
as well, this is something that will be important for us to understand together,
is that when that depression hits, right, the brain is in a threat, I guess,
detection kind of system. And this is where you may have heard about the fight or flight
response, you may have heard about the amygdala. So basically that amygdala kind of gets stuck
in activation. So the sympathetic nervous system kind of takes over and everything feels unsafe.
But when Jenny kind of engages in behavioural activation, like when she's in the garden with
you, for example, when she's accomplishing these small tasks or when she experiences
a certain degree of competence, when she's planted a seed and sees it sprout, her brain
kind of gets the evidence that things are actually manageable and she can do something about it,
that she matters. And that kind of shifts her thinking in the process as well. Now the
breathing work, right? What your sister discovered is that it's a tool that can
enhance that as well, that feeling. Now, it's very, very powerful when it's actually, I guess,
included in a larger context of rebuilding her life in a way. So when Jenny practises, say,
the slow mindful breathing through your garden work, and this is something we've also
discussed in our sessions, what she's actually doing is that she's improving her vagal
regulation. The vagus nerve is like a direct line communication between the brain and the body. So
when someone's blowing bubbles, essentially that vagal regulation happens and it sends the signal
back to the brain saying, hey, things are actually safe now, so you can actually loosen that whole
fight or flight response. So the amygdala will settle and her prefrontal cortex, which is
the part of our brain that we use to kind of look at the reasoning and rationalising and things like
that, right? It goes offline when the fight or flight sets in, but when we do that breathing,
such as in blowing bubbles with the children that you noticed, is where that prefrontal cortex kind
of comes back online and suddenly she's able to think, she's able to plan, she's able to engage
with things as well. So from a practical point of view, how do we fit the breathing
into the activities that we're already doing? That's a brilliant question there. So
from what you've told me so far, as well as from what I've heard from Jenny in our sessions as
well, I think you're already having these natural moments. You're already doing this through your
gardening, right? Between the tasks, for example, when she's maybe standing back looking at what
she's planted, you could pause and you could say something like, you know, how are you feeling? Or
if you notice that she is a little bit anxious, because we've been using these terms in our
sessions as well, she'll probably relate to it. Sometimes it's okay for you to just say, hey,
you look a little bit anxious at the moment. What I'm seeing, is that correct? Verify with her.
And if she says, yes, I am feeling a bit tense, then you can remind her, you know, you seem to
have been doing some of these exercises in Moni's session. Can we perhaps do that? Take a slow
breath in, count to four, hold it, breathe out slowly. And in that process, you're not really
using the word therapy, you're just kind of framing it in a practical way to help her,
you know, regulate her breath and therefore bring her anxiety levels down. Then in my sessions,
what I can do then is I can kind of reinforce it and say that, like, you know, I understand you and
feel doing some slow breathing work in the garden. So here's what's happening neurologically when
you do that. So she gets the experience from you, the real world practice from you in your
sessions, and she gets the understanding in our sessions together as well. I think that
combination will be quite powerful, I think. So the gardening then is the foundation,
and the breathing is a tool that she can practice to help her stay regulated
while she's doing the gardening. And together, that's going to help her through in the sessions.
Absolutely. And yes, it's one part of the equation in her therapeutic progress,
but it's a very important part of it as well. So that's exactly what the CBT, the behavioural
activation or the vagal regulation, all these things are working together here, right?
And here's what's something that's going to be even more powerful, I think, is that Jenny gets
two clinicians who actually understand each other. We're both speaking the same language
about her care. So that by itself, I think, will help her build her confidence. So we're not really
saying try bubble therapy. What we're saying is, here's how we can kind of help you rebuild your
capacity to perhaps engage, to regulate or think through difficult times like this, because there
is an evidence, there is a lot of evidence that actually supports every part of it, every piece of
it. So the gardening you're doing is not just an additional thing, Phil. I think it's central,
like, you know, it's a heartbeat in all of this. And I think that's where the real change kind of
happens. So keeping with the gardening, reinforce, keep helping her to get out, try and get more
engaged. And the breathing is something we add as a tool. And it's just one part of the bigger
picture. Absolutely, exactly. And I'd probably be grateful if you're open to it. I'd like to stay
in touch as we kind of introduce this. So I'll be seeing Jenny tomorrow so I can bring it up with her,
you know, in the session and kind of reinforce what you're doing. And I'll also let her know that,
you know, we've had this conversation and this is what we thought might help her and run it past her.
So giving her that agency to make that decision whether or not she wants to continue to engage
that way should be left up to her as well. Okay. So are you open to the idea of perhaps
me, forgive me, asking her a little bit about whether she'd want us both to come together in
one of these sessions and we can just find out what she wants? I think that would be good. So,
yeah, thank you for this chat. It's helped me to see the bigger picture and I think we can move
forward and really help Jenny with this. I really appreciated you getting back to me,
Phil, about this. I'll keep this conversation going. What I'll do is after my session tomorrow,
I apologize, my puppy in the background there. I probably need to finish this call soon for my
next appointment. But maybe we can circle back to this in our next conversation. Will that be okay?
Good. Talk soon. Thank you. All right. Thanks, Phil. Bye.
